 
Year       II  Course  Code:  228DSC116         Cr edits   4 
Semest er     III 
Course  Title:  Pr ogr amming    in  
Java 
Hours    52  
Formati  ve   Assessment    
Mar ks:  
Summati  ve 
Assessment    Mar ks:  
Dur ation  of  ES A:  03  hrs.  
Course  
Pr er equisit
es  
Students   should  ha ve basic pr ogramming   kno wledge,  including  variables,  
loops,  and  contr ol structur es. Familiarity  with  object-orient ed  concepts   
and  logical pr oblem-sol ving  skills  is recommended.    
Course  
Objecti ve 
This  course  aims  to intr oduce  students   to Java pr ogramming   with  a focus  
on  object-orient ed  principles,  exception  handling,  GUI  de velopment  , and  
multithr eading.  It pr epar es  students   to build  robust , reusable,  and  
inter active applications   using  Java. 
Course  
Out comes   
At the end  of the course,  the students   should  be  able  to: De velop  Java 
applications   using  OOP  concepts,  handle  exceptions  effectively, design  
GUIs  with  Swing,  and  implement   multithr eaded  pr ograms.  The y will  also  
gain experience  using  core Java libraries and  building  inter active, 
platform-independent    applications.  
 
Unit  No      Course  Content                                Hours  
UNIT   – 1 
Unit  1 – Java Basics  & OOP  Intr oduction   
Hist ory of Java, Java Featur es, JVM,  JRE,  JDK  Ar chit ectur e, Basic  
syntax,  Sample   Java Pr ogram , Ex ecution  of Java Pr ogram , 
Differ ence  betw een  C/C++  and  Java, Data  types,  Type  casting,  
Type  Con version , Arrays: One-Dimensional,    Multi-Dimensional   , 
Oper ators:  Arithmetic,  Relational,  Logical,  Bitwise , Contr ol 
Stat ements:  if, switch, loops  (for, while, do-w hile), br eak.  
13  
UNIT   – 2 
Unit  2 – Classes,  Inheritanc  e and  Interfac es  
Classes  and  Objects , Construct ors, this  keyw or d, Method   
Ov er loading , Static  methods   and  variables , Garbage  Collection , 
Inheritance  and  its types,  Method   Ov erriding , Abstr act Classes  
and  Interfaces , Lambda   Expr essions.   
13  
UNIT   – 3 
Unit  3 Packages,Ex  ception  Handling   & Multithr  eading   : 
Intr oduction   to API,  Java Packages: CLA SSPATH, import , 
java.lang, java.util, Intr oduction   to Errors and  its types,  
Ex ception  and  its types,  Ex ception  Handling   ,Creating  Custom  
Ex ceptions,  Intr oduction   to Multithr eading,  Life cy cle of a 
Thr ead,  Cr eating  Thr eads:  Extending  Thr ead,  Implementing    
Runnable,   Synchr onization:  synchr onized  methods   and  block s. 
    13  
 
UNIT   – 4 
Unit  4:Intr oduction   to GUI  
GUI  intr oduction,  Console  based  Vs GUI  based  applications,  
Intr oduction   to Swing,  Swing  Components,   Swing  Containers  : 
JFrame,  JPanel, JDialog,  Applet  and  its Life Cycle, Event 
Handling   Basics:  Action Events  , Item  Events , Text Events , 
Windo w Events , La yout Managers:   FlowLa yout, Bor derLa yout, 
GridLa yout 
13  
----------------Page (0) Break----------------
Text  books:   
1. Pr ogramming   with  JAVA-  balagurusam  y, E 
Refer enc es : 
1.  The  complet e Refer ence  Java–Schildt , Her bert . 
2.  Sun  Certified  Pr ogrammer   for  Java 5–  Kath y Sier a, Bert  Bates. 
3.  Java Pr ogramming:   Steven  Holzner . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
----------------Page (1) Break----------------
COURSE TITLE : Program m ing in Java Lab 
COURSE CODE : 228DSC117 
 
1.    W rite a Java pr ogram  to read an  array of integers  and  sort  it in ascending  or der. 
2.    W rite a Java pr ogram  to demonstr  ate the concept  of a class and  object . 
3.    W rite a Java pr ogram  to demonstr  ate the concept  of construct ors.  
4.   W rite a Java pr ogram  to demonstr  ate method   over loading.  
5.   W rite a Java pr ogram  to demonstr  ate method   overriding.  
6.    W rite a Java pr ogram  to demonstr  ate the usage  of this  and  super  keyw or ds. 
7.   W rite a Java pr ogram  to implement   an  inner  class and  demonstr  ate its access  
      pr otection. 
8.   W rite a Java pr ogram  to demonstr  ate the wor king  of multiple  catch  block s. 
9.   W rite a Java pr ogram  to demonstr  ate inheritance  using  abstr act classes  and  abstr act 
Methods.   
10.   W rite a Java pr ogram  to demonstr  ate multiple  inheritance  using  interfaces. 
11.   W rite a Java pr ogram  to demonstr  ate the wor king  of try, catch, and  finally block s in 
exception  handling.  
12.   W rite a Java pr ogram  to demonstr  ate the use of pack ages. 
13.   W rite a Java pr ogram  to create and  start a thread.  
14.   W rite a JavaFX  application  to displa y "Hello  Wor ld". 
15.   W rite a JavaFX  pr ogram  to create a GUI  using  butt ons and  implement   event handling.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
----------------Page (2) Break----------------
Python Program m ing 
 
Year 
 
I    Course  Code:  228DSC118      Cr edits            
Semest er  
 
I 
Course  Title:  Python   
Pr ogr amming    
Hours          50  
   Formati  ve Assessment    
Mar ks:  
Summati  ve 
Assessment    Mar ks:  
Dur ation  of  ES A:   
Course  
Pr er equisit
es  
 
A course  on  “Programming   for  Pr oblem  Solving  using  C”.  
Course  
Objecti ve 
   Thr oug hout  the course,  students   will  be  expect ed  to demonstr  ate their  
understanding   of Pr ogramming   by being  able  to do  each  of the follo wing:   
● Learn  Syntax  and  Semantics   and  create Functions   in Python.      
● Handle   Strings  and  Files in Python.      
● Understand    Lists,  Dictionaries   and  Regular  expressions  in Python.      
● Implement   Object  Orient ed  Pr ogramming   concepts   in Python.      
● Build  Web  Services  and  intr oduction   to Netw or k and  Database   
Pr ogramming   in Python.  
Course  
Out comes   
   On  completion   of this  course,  the students   should  be  able  to:  
● Ex amine  Python   syntax  and  semantics  and  be  fluent  in the use of 
Python   flow contr ol and functions.          
● Demonstr  ate pr oficiency  in handling   Strings  and  File  Systems.    
● Cr eate, run and  manipulat  e Python   Pr ograms  using  core data  
structur es  like Lists,  Dictionaries   and  use Regular  Expr essions.      
● Interpr et the concepts   of Object-Orient  ed  Pr ogramming   as  used  in 
Python.  ∙ Implement   exemplary  applications   relat ed  to Netw or k 
Pr ogramming,   Web  Services  and    Databases   in Python.  
Unit  No  
 
Course  Content 
Hour
s 
UNIT   – 1 
   Intr oduction   featur es  of python,  Installation,  Ex ecution  of python  
pr ogram, Python virtual      machine.   Basic  Concepts:  Data  types,  
Variables,  Oper ators and  its types,  Mathematical    functions,  Input  
Output  stat ements.  Contr ol Structur es: if stat ements,  while  loop, 
for  loop, nest ed  loop, br eak,  continue,  pass, assert , return  
stat ements.       Functions    Defining   functions,   function   with  
paramet ers,  return  values  and  return stat    ements,  Lamda  functions,  
Local  and  Global  scope,  Recursion.  
12  
UNIT   – 2 
 
Arr ays,  Strings,   Lists,   Tuples   and   Dictionaries    Arrays: 
Advantages  of arrays, creating  an  array, importing  an  array 
module,  Inde xing  and  Slicing on  array. Strings:      Cr eating  the 
strings,  Inde xing  and  Slicing the strings.  Wor king  with  lists: Cr eate, 
Access,  Updat e and  Delet e the lists, Inde xing  and  slicing oper ations  
on  lists. Wor king with     Tuples:  Cr eate, Access,  Updat e and  Delet e 
the Tuple, Basic  oper ations  on  Tuples.     Dictionaries:  Oper ations  on  
Dictionaries,  Dictionaries   methods.   
12  
----------------Page (3) Break----------------
Textbook:  
1.  Dr. R. Nageswara Rao “Core Python Programming” 2nd edition, 
Dreamtech  press.2019  
 
REFERENCES:  
1.  Allen  Downey,  Jeffrey  Elkner,  Chris  Meyers  “Learning W ith 
Python”,Ddreamtech  press.2019  
2. Charles Dierbach - “Introduction To Computer Science Using Python”, 
W iley  publication. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT   – 3 
   Intr oduction   to OOP s in  python  Pr oblems   in pr ocedur e orient ed  
appr oach,  featur es of   OOP s, Cr eating  classes  and  objects.  Files and  
exception  Handling   Opening  and closing    files, reading  and  
writing  files. Ex ception:  What  is Ex ception?  Ex ception handling,       
except  clause,  try, finally clause,  user  defined  exceptions.        
12  
UNIT   – 4 
   GUI  Pr ogr amming    (Tkint er) and  Database   connecti vity: 
Intr oduction,  La yout management       with  pack,  grid  and  place,  
Widgets  and  attribut es: Frame,  Label,  Butt on, Check  butt on, Radio  
butt on, Entry , List  bo x, Text. Events  and  bindings,  dr awing  
on can  vas  (line, oval, rectang le, ar c.). Database:  Installing  mysql, 
connection,  accessing  connect or  module   using  connect , cursor , 
execut e & close functions,  Reading sing     le & multiple  results  of 
query  execution.  
14  
----------------Page (4) Break----------------
COURSE TITLE : Python Program m ing Lab 
COURSE CODE : 228DSC119 
 
1.   W rite a pr ogram  to demonstr  ate differ ent number   data  types  in Python.      
2.   W rite a pr ogram  to perf orm  differ ent Arithmetic   Oper ations  on  numbers   in 
Python.   
3.   W rite a pr ogram  to create, concat enat e and  print a string  and  accessing  
sub-string   from  a given  string.     
4.   W rite a python  script  to print the curr ent date in the follo wing  format  “Sun 
Sept  29  02:26:23   IST 2025”     
5.   W rite a python  pr ogram  to find  the factorial of a number   using  Recursion.  
6.   W rite a python  pr ogram  to print Fibonacci  series. 
7.   W rite a python  pr ogram  to check  palindr omes.  
8.   W rite a Python   script  that  prints  prime  numbers   less  than  30. 
9.   W rite a python  pr ogram  on  Lambda   functions  with  differ ent methods.    
10.  W rite a pr ogram  to create, append,  and  remo ve lists in python.     
11.  W rite a pr ogram  to demonstr  ate wor king  with  tuples  in python.     
12.  W rite a pr ogram  to demonstr  ate wor king  with  dictionaries   in python.     
13.  W rite a Python   pr ogram  to demonstr  ate Nest ed  if stat ements.      
14.  W rite a Python   pr ogram  to construct  a patt ern using  a loop.    
15.  W rite a python  pr ogram  to demonstr  ate Inde xing  and  Slicing of an  array. 
16.  Python   pr ogram  on  variable  length  and  default  ar guments.       
17.  W rite a python  pr ogram  to perf orm  the follo wing  file 
oper ations:      
a.   Open  a file in writ e and  binary  mode     
b.   Displa y file name     
c.   W rite text to file   
d.   To read from  the file   
18.  Python   pr ogram  on  exception  handling.       
19.  W rite a pr ogram  to connect  to database   MySql  and  perf orm  CR UD oper   ations.      
20.  W rite a Titkint er  pr ogram  to dr aw the oper ation of gr aphics  shapes.      
 
 
----------------Page (5) Break----------------
 
Year    1  CourseCode: 228DSC120  Credits     4 
Sem este
r 
II  
Course Title: Operating 
System   
Hours      50 
Form ative 
Assessm ent 
Marks: 20 
Sum m ative 
Assessm ent  Marks: 
80 
Duration of ESA: 03 hrs. 
Course 
Prerequ
isites 
Basic  Programming  Knowledge  Data  Structures  & 
Algorithms Mathematical Foundations 
Course 
Objectiv
e 
To introduce the concept of Operating system. 
To acquire the fundamental knowledge of the operating 
system architecture and components 
To know the various operations performed by the 
operating system. 
Course 
Outcom
es 
At the end of the course, the students should be able to:  
Understand the basic working process of an operating 
system. 
 Understand the importance of process and scheduling. 
 Understand the problems in process synchronization and 
memory management. 
Unit No              Course Content 
Hou
rs 
UNIT – 1 
DEFINITION –Introduction, Types of Operating 
System, Functions of Operating system, Operating 
System structure. Operating system components 
and services, System Programs, Virtual Machine. 
 PROCESS MANAGEMENT 
Process concept (program, process and thread), 
process   scheduling,   Cooperating   process, 
Inter-process  communication,  CPU  Scheduling 
Criteria, scheduling algorithm (FCFS, SJF, Round 
Robin ,priority scheduling). 
15 
UNIT – 2 
PROCESS SYNCHRONIZATION AND DEADLOCK 
process synchronization – semaphores, critical 
section   problems,   classic   problems   of 
synchronization critical region. 
DEADLOCK:    System   model,   deadlock 
characterization, methods for handling deadlock ( 
deadlock prevention, avoidance and detection) 
using resource allocation graph , Recovery from 
deadlock. 
13 
----------------Page (6) Break----------------
UNIT – 3 
MEMORY MANAGEMENT 
Logical and physical address space, swapping 
contiguous allocation, Paging, Segmentation.  
VIRTUAL  MEMORY  MANAGEMENT:  Demand 
paging, Page replacement , page replacement 
algorithm(FIFO,LRU,ORU)  allocation  of  frames, 
thrashing , page size and other considerations and 
demand segmentation. 
12 
UNIT – 4 
FILE MANAGEMENT (System, Secondary storage 
structure): 
 File concepts, Access methods, Directory structure, 
Protection and consistency, semantics, File system 
structure,  Allocation  methods,  free  space 
management, Directory Implementation,  
Efficiency and performance, recovery. 
DISK  MANAGEMENT:  Disk  structure  and 
Scheduling methods, Disk management, Swap – 
Space management. Protection and Security: Goals 
of protection, Domain protection, Access matrix 
security problem,  
Authentication,  One  time  password,  program 
threats, system threats. 
15 
 
 
Text books: 
1.  Operating System by Milan Milinkovic, McGraw Hill. (5th Edition) 
2.  Abraham Siberschatz and Peter Bear Galvin, Operating System 
Concepts, Fifth Edition, Addision – Wesley 19989 (Chapter 1,3.1 , 3.2, 
3.3, 3.4, 3.6, 4, 5, 6 (Except 6.8, 6.9),7,8,9,10,11,13,(Except 13.6) 19 
(Except 19.6),20(Except 20.8,20.9), 22,23) 
3.  Nutt: Operating system, 3/e Person Education 2004 
References: 
1.  Operating System by Madnick and Donoval, McGraw Hill. 
2.  Operating Systems: Internals and Design Principles, by W illiam 
Stallings, seventh 
edition 
3.  Operating System Concepts by James L Peterson. (2nd Edition) 
4.  Operating System Design and Implementation by Andrew S 
Tenenbaum. (3rd 
----------------Page (7) Break----------------
5.  Edition) 
 
 
 
 
----------------Page (8) Break----------------
